## From database to REST API in 30 seconds

Portofino 6 is the next generation of ManyDesigns Portofino, the result of decades of experience in model-driven, 
less-code application frameworks.

Portofino connects to your databases, constructs an enriched model of your data, and exposes it with a REST API.


Authentication and authorization are built-in (using Apache Shiro) or can be managed externally with your favorite 
implementation. 

### Heavily customizable

Adding new queries with new options amounts to writing configuration files. Each query represents a subset of your data 
that comes with the following operations out of the box:
- **Search** with criteria involving multiple fields and operators (e.g., "name starts with P and age is greater than 18")
- **Create** a new object (database row)
- **Read** an object given its ID
- **Update** a single object or multiple objects in a single API call
- **Delete** one or more objects

If the above generic operations are not adequate for the API you're building, you can easily integrate new custom 
operations with light coding in Groovy or Java, or you can call any other JVM languages, JavaScript included, from those.

Portofino is built on top of Spring and Hibernate and is designed to be a nice citizen in a microservices environment.

## UI

Portofino 6 doesn't come with a built-in UI, unlike its predecessors.

In fact, in today's web development world, there's a proliferation of UI technologies, and styling and UX expectations
are higher than in the past. It's not possible to build a dynamically-generated UI that satisfies everyone.

That said, your web developers can build great applications on top of the APIs generated by Portofino, reusing a variety
of libraries. These applications can be tailor-made with your favorite technologies, or for quicker turnaround you can 
use ready-made UI builders for Angular and React.  
